After understanding the base classes, we can now finally implement a servlet.
On the surface, this is reasonably straightforward.
We provide our own class, in this case called OurServlet,
and we have this extends the HttpServlet class.
In here, we override any methods we need to, in this case, doGet.
We could also override the other verb helper methods,
such as doPost or doPut, if we needed to.
In the overwritten doGet method,
we process our request and generate the response
needed for this particular servlet.
We can also, if we needed to, override the init method,
and in here we provide any initialization needed for this servlet.
For this to work, however, there's one extra thing that we need.
Currently we can deploy the servlet, but we can't browse to it.
If we try and send a request to the server,
the server has no way of identifying the servlet
that the request is intended for.
To fix that, we have to add a servlet mapping.
And as we'll see in a moment, we can add servlet mappings via the web.xml file,
but another way of adding the servlet mapping is to add
an annotation into the servlet itself.
The annotation looks something like this.
It's the WebServlet annotation,
and in this case we're using the simplest form of that and just
adding a URL as the value of the annotation.
Now we can browse to that URL and we'll see the servlet.
We are now in a position to write our first servlet.
We have the project already set up here inside IDEA,
and what we're going to do is to add a servlet called FirstServlet,
add a mapping to that servlet, and then deploy the application to Tomcat,
and hopefully browse to the application and see the output from the servlet.
So to add a servlet, we already have a package setup,
so we can right-click, do New Java Class,
and call this SimpleServlet.
This is going to extend HttpServlet, and in here,
we will override the doGet method.
So we can override method, we can pick doGet,
get rid of the call to super, and then from here we can output some data.
To use that, we can use the response object,
so we can say, response.getWriter .write,
and of course we have to write Hello World.
As we saw in the presentation, there's one extra thing we have to do.
We have to add an annotation to the servlet to provide the mapping,
so we say @WebServlet, and we give this name to the mapping,
which will be /home.
Once we have that, we can now deploy the servlet,
and we're using Maven for that, so we have a Maven project set up.
I can go to my Tomcat plugin, use redeploy, and redeploy the servlet.
The application will be called Simple when we deploy it,
so we should be able to browse to localhost/simple/home.
So let this run for a moment.
The application is deployed, so we can now go and look for Chrome,
browse to localhost:8080/simple/home, and there we see Hello World.
Now that we've written our first servlet,
we have to get the servlet to handle any incoming requests.
To do that, we have to map incoming URLs on to a specific instance of a servlet,
and that's done via the web.xml file.
As we can see here, when we send a request to the server,
the request looks like this.
The first line of the HTTP request will contain the name of the verb,
in this case GET, the URL the request is going to,
and the version of HTTP being used.
What we care about here is the URL.
That URL is read by the servlet container.
The servlet container also has access to the web.xml file of our application,
and that XML file will contain what are known as servlet mappings.
Those mappings will tell the container how to map
this incoming URL on to our servlet.
The servlet mappings look like this.
Notice that there are two main parts to this.
There's a servlet section and a servlet-mapping section.
In the servlet section, you have the fully-qualified class name of our servlet.
The servlet also has a name, in this case Home,
and that name is used by the mapping sections.
The servlet mappings use the name we give the servlet,
map that name on to a URL.
In fact, it maps the name on to a URL pattern,
and the pattern can either be /something,
so in this /bar, or it can be *.
something, where map a file extension on to the actual servlet itself.
What this XML provides in this case is that any URL that ends with /bar,
or any URL that ends with * .abc will be mapped on to our home servlet,
and what that means is that com.mantiso .OurServlet class will be loaded,
and its service method will be called.
We are now in a position to add extra servlet mappings to our application.
We already have the mapping to /home, and we'll leave that in place,
and go add the extra mappings to the web.xml file.
So in here we add a servlet entry.
The servlet will have a name, in our case we'll just call that Simple,
and we'll give the servlet a servlet class,
and that's going to be com.mantiso .SimpleServlet.
Once we have the servlet in place, we need to add a servlet mapping,
and this maps from some URL to some servlet.
We do the mapping via the name, which in this case again is Simple,
and provide the URL pattern of * .do.
Once we have that, we can go back to our Maven setup,
go to Tomcat redeploy, and redeploy the application.
We can now go and find Chrome.
And again, from Chrome, we can browse to localhost:8080/simple/home.
In that case it's back to Hello World,
and we can browse to anything that ends with .do,
and that should also hit our servlet.
So let's do kevin.do, and there we go, hit the servlet,
and we see the text Hello World.
So we've seen in the slides that we can add
multiple mappings in the web.xml file.
We can also do the same thing by using the annotations on the servlet.
If we go back into the project and remove the mappings from the web.xml file,
if we redeploy just to prove that this no longer works,
leave that run, go back into the browser,
and refresh, then we can't hit the extension as the .do mapping is now gone.
So back into the project.
If we go back to the servlet, currently we have a single mapping for the servlet,
just /home.
What we can do here is add a urlPatterns entry to the annotation.
This takes a collection of mappings.
We can say /home, and then if we add the * .do mapping to this,
and again we can redeploy, you just give that a few seconds.
Go back to the browser and refresh, and sure enough,
that mapping now works and that URL now works,
and we can get back to the .do extension.
So the obvious question I guess is which one to use?
Do you use the annotation or use the web.xml file?
If you're migrating an application and you already have the web.xml file,
it's perfectly fine to leave that in place.
If you're writing a brand new Servlet 3.0 application, then you have the choice.
I think the key thing is to use one or the other.
Either use the annotations or use the web.xml file, but try not to mix and match.